Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 1 of 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRODUCT MONOGRAPH 
 
INCLUDING PATIENT MEDICATION INFORMATION 
 
 
NCodeine Contin® 
 
Codeine Controlled Release Tablets  
50 mg 100 mg 150 mg and 200 mg 
 
Purdue Pharma Std. 
 
Opioid Analgesic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purdue Pharma 
575 Granite Court 
Pickering, ON 
L1W 3W8 
Date of Revision: 
September 12, 2018 
 
Submission Control No.: 216666 
 
Codeine Contin
® is a trademark of Purdue Pharma 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 2 of 45 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
PART  I: HEALTH PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION ........................................................ 3 
SUMMARY PRODUCT INFORMATION .................................................................. 3 
INDICATIONS AND CLINICAL USE ........................................................................ 3 
CONTRAINDICATIONS ............................................................................................. 4 
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS ............................................................................ 4 
ADVERSE REACTIONS ............................................................................................ 15 
DRUG INTERACTIONS ............................................................................................ 17 
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ........................................................................ 18 
OVERDOSAGE ........................................................................................................... 24 
ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY....................................................... 25 
STORAGE AND STABILITY .................................................................................... 27 
SPECIAL HANDLING INSTRUCTIONS ................................................................. 27 
DOSAGE FORMS, COMPOSITION AND PACKAGING ....................................... 28 
PART II:  SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION .............................................................................. 30 
PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION .................................................................... 30 
CLINICAL TRIALS .................................................................................................... 32 
DETAILED PHARMACOLOGY ............................................................................... 32 
MICROBIOLOGY ....................................................................................................... 32 
TOXICOLOGY ........................................................................................................... 33 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................. 34 
PATIENT MEDICATION INFORMATION .......................................................................... 36 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 3 of 45 
 
 
NCodeine Contin® 
(codeine controlled release tablets) 
 
 
PART I: HEALTH PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION 
 
 
SUMMARY PRODUCT INFORMATION 
 
Route of 
Administration 
Dosage Form / 
Strengths 
Nonmedicinal Ingredients 
Oral Controlled Release 
Tablets / 50 mg, 100 mg, 
150 mg and 200 mg 
D&C Yellow No. 10 Aluminum Lake (100 mg), 
FD&C Blue No. 2 Aluminum Lake (50 mg),  FD&C 
Red No. 40 Aluminum Lake (150 mg), FD&C 
Yellow No. 6 Aluminum Lake (100 mg, 150 mg and 
200 mg), hydroxyethyl cellulose, hydroxypropyl 
cellulose, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, lactose, 
magnesium stearate, polyethylene glycol, stearyl 
alcohol, talc and titanium dioxide 
 
INDICATIONS AND CLINICAL USE 
 
Adults: 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets) is indicated for the relief of mild to 
moderate pain requiring the prolonged use of an opioid analgesic preparation. 
 
Codeine Contin is not indicated as an as-needed (prn) analgesic  
 
Geriatrics (> 65 years of age): 
In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, usually starting at the low end 
of the dosing range, and titrated slowly, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, 
renal, or cardiac function, concomitant disease or other drug therapy (see ACTION AND 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Special Populations and Conditions, Geriatrics). 
 
Pediatrics (< 18 years of age): 
Regardless of the clinical setting, codeine, including Codeine Contin, should not be used in 
children below the age of 12 years because of the risk of opioid toxicity due to the variable and 
unpredictable metabolism of codeine to morphine (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, 
Special Populations and Conditions, Pediatrics; also, DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION). 
 
Codeine Contin has not been studied in the pediatric population, therefore the use of Codeine 
Contin is not recommended in patients over 12 and under 18 years of age.  
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 4 of 45 
 
 
CONTRAINDICATIONS 
 
• Patients who are hypersensitive to the active substance (codeine) or other opioid analgesics 
or any other ingredient in the formulation.  For a complete listing, see the DOSAGE 
FORMS, COMPOSITION AND PACKAGING section of the Product Monograph. 
 
• In patients with known or suspected mechanical gastrointestinal obstruction (e.g., bowel 
obstruction, strictures) or any diseases/conditions that affect bowel transit (e.g., ileus of any 
type). 
• Patients with suspected surgical abdomen (e.g., acute appendicitis or pancreatitis). 
• Patients with intermittent or short duration pain that can be managed with other pain 
medications. 
• Patients with acute or mild pain that can be managed with immediate release pain 
medications. 
• Patients with acute or severe bronchial asthma, chronic obstructive airway, and status 
asthmaticus. 
• Patients with acute respiratory depression, elevated carbon dioxide levels in the blood, and 
cor pulmonale. 
• Patients with acute alcoholism, delirium tremens, and convulsive disorders. 
• Patients with severe CNS depression, increased cerebrospinal or intracranial pressure, and 
head injury. 
• CYP2D6 ultra-rapid metabolizers who convert codeine into its active metabolite more 
rapidly and completely than other people (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Risk 
of Death in Ultra-Rapid Metabolizers of Codeine; SYMPTOMS AND TREATMENT of 
OVERDOSAGE, Codeine) 
• Patients taking monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors (or within 14 days of such therapy). 
• Women who are breast-feeding, pregnant, or during labour and delivery (see Serious 
Warnings and Precautions and Warning and Precautions). 
• Pediatric patients (<18 years of age) who have undergone tonsillectomy and/or 
adenoidectomy for obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome. 
 
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS 
SERIOUS WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS 
 
Limitations of Use 
Because of the risks of addiction, abuse, and misuse with opioids, even at recommended 
doses, and because of the risks of overdose and death with controlled-release opioid 
formulations, Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets) should only be used in 
patients for whom alternative treatment options (e.g., non-opioid analgesics) are 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 5 of 45 
 
 
ineffective, not tolerated, or would be otherwise inadequate to provide appropriate 
management of pain (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). 
 
 
Addiction, Abuse, and Misuse  
Codeine Contin poses risks of opioid addiction, abuse, and misuse, which can lead to 
overdose and death. Each patient’s risk should be assessed prior to prescribing Codeine 
Contin, and all patients should be monitored regularly for the development of these 
behaviours or conditions (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS). Codeine Contin 
should be stored securely to avoid theft or misuse. 
 
Life-threatening Respiratory Depression: OVERDOSE  
Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression may occur with use of Codeine 
Contin. Infants exposed in-utero or through breast milk are at risk of life-threatening 
respiratory depression upon delivery or when nursed. Patients should be monitored for 
respiratory depression, especially during initiation of Codeine Contin or following a dose 
increase. 
 
Codeine Contin must be swallowed whole; cutting, breaking, crushing, chewing, or 
dissolving Codeine Contin can lead to dangerous adverse events including death (see 
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS). Further, instruct patients of the hazards related to 
taking opioids including fatal overdose. 
 
Accidental Exposure  
Accidental ingestion of even one dose of Codeine Contin, especially by children, can 
result in a fatal overdose of codeine (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, Disposal, 
for instructions on proper disposal).  
 
Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome  
Prolonged maternal use of Codeine Contin during pregnancy can result in neonatal 
opioid withdrawal syndrome, which may be life-threatening (see WARNINGS AND 
PRECAUTIONS). 
 
Interaction with Alcohol 
The co-ingestion of alcohol with Codeine Contin should be avoided as it may result in 
dangerous additive effects, causing serious injury or death (see WARNINGS AND 
PRECAUTIONS and DRUG INTERACTIONS). 
 
Risks From Concomitant Use With Benzodiazepines Or Other CNS Depressants 
Concomitant use of opioids with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants, including 
alcohol, may result in profound sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death (see 
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Neurologic and DRUG INTERACTIONS). 
 Reserve concomitant prescribing of Codeine Contin and benzodiazepines or other 
CNS depressants for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are 
inadequate. 
 Limit dosages and durations to the minimum required. 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 6 of 45 
 
 
 Follow patients for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and sedation.  
General 
Codeine Contin must be swallowed whole, and should not be chewed, dissolved or crushed.  
Taking broken, chewed, dissolved or crushed tablets could lead to the rapid release and 
absorption of a potentially fatal dose of codeine.  All strengths may be halved, except 50 
mg.  The half tablets must also be swallowed intact. 
 
Patients should be instructed not to give Codeine Contin to anyone other than the patient 
for whom it was prescribed, as such, inappropriate use may have severe medical 
consequences, including death. Codeine Contin should be stored securely to avoid theft or 
misuse. 
 
Codeine Contin should only be prescribed by healthcare professionals who are 
knowledgeable in the continuous administration of potent opioids, in the management of 
patients receiving potent opioids for the treatment of pain, and in the detection and 
management of respiratory depression, including the use of opioid antagonists. 
 
Patients should be cautioned not to consume alcohol while taking Codeine Contin, as it may 
increase the chance of experiencing dangerous side effects, including death.  
 
Hyperalgesia that will not respond to a further dose increase of codeine may occur in particular 
in high doses. A codeine dose reduction or change in opioid may be required. 
 
Patients should be counselled to discontinue codeine products and to seek urgent medical help at 
the earliest sign of codeine toxicity including symptoms such as confusion, shallow breathing, or 
extreme sleepiness which may be life threatening.  
Abuse and Misuse  
Like all opioids, Codeine Contin is a potential drug of abuse and misuse, which can lead to 
overdose and death. Therefore, Codeine Contin should be prescribed and handled with caution. 
 
Patients should be assessed for their clinical risks for opioid abuse or addiction prior to being 
prescribed opioids. All patients receiving opioids should be routinely monitored for signs of 
misuse and abuse. 
 
Opioids, such as Codeine Contin, should be used with particular care in patients with a history 
of alcohol and illicit/prescription drug abuse. However, concerns about abuse, addiction, and 
diversion should not prevent the proper management of pain. 
 
Codeine Contin tablets are intended for oral use only. The tablets should be swallowed whole, 
and not chewed or crushed. With parenteral abuse, the tablet excipients can be expected to result 
in local tissue necrosis, infection, pulmonary granulomas, and increased risk of endocarditis and 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 7 of 45 
 
 
valvular heart injury, which may also be fatal. Abuse of oral dosage forms can be expected to 
result in serious adverse events, including death. 
Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis 
See TOXICOLOGY section.  
Cardiovascular 
Codeine administration may result in severe hypotension in patients whose ability to maintain 
adequate blood pressure is compromised by reduced blood volume, or concurrent administration 
of such drugs as phenothiazines and other tranquilizers, sedative/hypnotics, tricyclic 
antidepressants or general anesthetics. These patients should be monitored for signs of hypotension 
after initiating or titrating the dose of Codeine Contin.  
 
The use of Codeine Contin in patients with circulatory shock should be avoided as it may cause 
vasodilation that can further reduce cardiac output and blood pressure. 
Dependence/Tolerance 
As with other opioids, tolerance and physical dependence may develop upon repeated 
administration of Codeine Contin and there is potential for development of psychological 
dependence.  Codeine Contin should therefore be prescribed and handled with the degree of 
caution appropriate to the use of a drug with abuse potential.   
 
Physical dependence and tolerance reflect the neuroadaptation of the opioid receptors to chronic 
exposure to an opioid, and are separate and distinct from abuse and addiction. Tolerance, as well 
as physical dependence, may develop upon repeated administration of opioids, and are not by 
themselves evidence of an addictive disorder or abuse. 
 
Patients on prolonged therapy should be tapered gradually from the drug if it is no longer 
required for pain control. Withdrawal symptoms may occur following abrupt discontinuation of 
therapy or upon administration of an opioid antagonist. Some of the symptoms that may be 
associated with abrupt withdrawal of an opioid analgesic include body aches, diarrhea, 
gooseflesh, loss of appetite, nausea, nervousness or restlessness, anxiety, runny nose, sneezing, 
tremors or shivering, stomach cramps, tachycardia, trouble with sleeping, unusual increase in 
sweating, palpitations, unexplained fever, weakness and yawning (see ADVERSE 
REACTIONS, DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, Adjustment or Reduction of Dosage). 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 8 of 45 
 
 
Use in Drug and Alcohol Addiction 
Codeine Contin is an opioid with no approved use in the management of addictive disorders. Its 
proper usage in individuals with drug or alcohol dependence, either active or in remission is for 
the management of pain requiring opioid analgesia. 
 
Patients with a history of addiction to drugs or alcohol may be at higher risk of becoming 
addicted to Codeine Contin unless used under extreme caution and awareness. 
 
Metabolism 
 
Risk of Death in Ultra-Rapid Metabolizers of Codeine:  Some individuals, may be ultra-rapid 
metabolizers due to a specific CYP2D6*2x2 genotype. These individuals convert codeine into its 
active metabolite, morphine, more rapidly and completely than other people.  This rapid 
conversion results in higher than expected serum morphine levels.  Even at labelled dosage 
regimens, individuals who are ultra-rapid metabolizers may experience overdose symptoms such 
as extreme sleepiness, confusion, or shallow breathing. (See also Labour, Delivery and 
Nursing Women in Special Populations).   
 
The prevalence of this CYP2D6 phenotype varies widely and has been estimated at 0.5 to 1% in 
Chinese and Japanese, 0.5 to 1% in Hispanics, 1 to 10% in Caucasians, 3% in African 
Americans, and 16 to 28% in North Africans, Ethiopians, and Arabs. Data are not available for 
other ethnic groups. When physicians prescribe codeine-containing drugs, they should choose 
the lowest effective dose for the shortest period of time and inform their patients about these 
risks and the signs of morphine overdose (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, Dosing 
Considerations).   
Endocrine 
Adrenal Insufficiency: Cases of adrenal insufficiency have been reported with opioid use, more 
often following greater than one month of use. Presentation of adrenal insufficiency may include 
non-specific symptoms and signs including nausea, vomiting, anorexia, fatigue, weakness, 
dizziness, and low blood pressure. If adrenal insufficiency is suspected, confirm the diagnosis 
with diagnostic testing as soon as possible. If adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed, treat with 
physiologic replacement doses of corticosteroids. Wean the patient off of the opioid to allow 
adrenal function to recover and continue corticosteroid treatment until adrenal function recovers. 
Other opioids may be tried as some cases reported use of a different opioid without recurrence of 
adrenal insufficiency. The information available does not identify any particular opioids as being 
more likely to be associated with adrenal insufficiency. 
Gastrointestinal Effects 
Codeine and other morphine-like opioids have been shown to decrease bowel motility.  Codeine 
may obscure the diagnosis or clinical course of patients with acute abdominal conditions (see 
CONTRAINDICATIONS and ADVERSE REACTIONS, Nausea and Vomiting and 
Constipation). 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 9 of 45 
 
 
Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome (NOWS) 
Prolonged maternal use of opioid during pregnancy can result in withdrawal signs in the neonate. 
Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, unlike opioid withdrawal syndrome in adults, may be 
life-threatening. 
 
Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome presents as irritability, hyperactivity and abnormal sleep 
pattern, high pitched cry, tremor, vomiting, diarrhea and failure to gain weight. The onset, 
duration, and severity of neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome vary based on the specific opioid 
used, duration of use, timing and amount of last maternal use, and rate of elimination of the drug 
by the newborn. 
 
Use of Codeine Contin is contraindicated in pregnant women (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).  
Neurologic 
Interactions with  CNS Depressants (including benzodiazepines and alcohol):  Codeine 
should be used with caution and in reduced dosage during concomitant administration of other 
opioid analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines and other tranquilizers, sedative-hypnotics, 
tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotics, antihistamines, benzodiazepines, centrally-active anti-
emetics and other CNS depressants.  Respiratory depression, hypotension and profound sedation, 
coma or death may result.   
 
Observational studies have demonstrated that concomitant use of opioid analgesics and 
benzodiazepines increases the risk of drug-related mortality compared to use of opioid analgesics 
alone. Because of similar pharmacological properties, it is reasonable to expect similar risk with 
the concomitant use of other CNS depressant drugs with opioid analgesics (see DRUG 
INTERACTIONS). If the decision is made to prescribe a benzodiazepine or other CNS 
depressant concomitantly with an opioid analgesic, prescribe the lowest effective dosages and 
minimum durations of concomitant use. In patients already receiving an opioid analgesic, 
prescribe a lower initial dose of the benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant than indicated in 
the absence of an opioid, and titrate based on clinical response. If an opioid analgesic is initiated 
in a patient already taking a benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant, prescribe a lower initial 
dose of the opioid analgesic, and titrate based on clinical response. Follow patients closely for 
signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and sedation. 
 
Advise both patients and caregivers about the risks of respiratory depression and sedation when 
Codeine Contin is used with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants (including alcohol and 
illicit drugs). Advise patients not to drive or operate heavy machinery until the effects of 
concomitant use of the benzodiazepine or other CNS depressant have been determined. Screen 
patients for risk of substance use disorders, including opioid abuse and misuse, and warn them of 
the risk for overdose and death associated with the use of additional CNS depressants including 
alcohol and illicit drugs (see DRUG INTERACTIONS). 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 10 of 45 
 
 
Codeine Contin should not be consumed with alcohol as it may increase the chance of 
experiencing dangerous side effects, including death (see CONTRAINDICATIONS with 
ADVERSE REACTIONS, Sedation, and DRUG INTERACTIONS). 
 
Severe pain antagonizes the subjective and respiratory depressant actions of opioid analgesics.  
Should pain suddenly subside, these effects may rapidly manifest.   
 
Use in Patients with Convulsive or Seizure Disorders: The codeine in Codeine Contin may 
aggravate convulsions in patients with convulsive disorders, and may induce or aggravate 
seizures in some clinical settings. Therefore, Codeine Contin should not be used in these 
patients (see CONTRAINDICATIONS). 
 
Serotonin Syndrome: Codeine Contin could cause a rare but potentially life-threatening 
condition resulting from concomitant administration of serotonergic drugs (e.g. anti-depressants, 
migraine medications). Treatment with the serotonergic drug should be discontinued if such 
events (characterized by clusters of symptoms such as hyperthermia, rigidity, myoclonus, 
autonomic instability with possible rapid fluctuations of vital signs, mental status changes 
including confusion, irritability, extreme agitation progressing to delirium and coma) occur and 
supportive symptomatic treatment should be initiated. Codeine Contin should not be used in 
combination with MAO inhibitors or serotonin-precursors (such as L-tryptophan, oxitriptan) and 
should be used with caution in combination with other serotonergic drugs (triptans, certain 
tricyclic antidepressants, lithium, tramadol, St. John’s Wort) due to the risk of serotonergic 
syndrome (see DRUG INTERACTIONS). 
 
Head Injury: The respiratory depressant effects of codeine and the capacity to elevate 
cerebrospinal fluid pressure, may be greatly increased in the presence of an already elevated 
intracranial pressure produced by trauma. Also, codeine may produce confusion, miosis, 
vomiting and other side effects which obscure the clinical course of patients with head injury. In 
such patients, codeine must be used with extreme caution and only if it is judged essential (see 
CONTRAINDICATIONS). 
Peri-Operative Considerations 
Codeine Contin is not indicated for pre-emptive analgesia (administration preoperatively for the 
management of post-operative pain). 
 
In the case of planned chordotomy or other pain-relieving operations, patients should not be 
treated with Codeine Contin for at least 24 hours before the operation and it should not be used 
in the immediate post-operative period. 
 
Physicians should individualize treatment, moving from parenteral to oral analgesics as 
appropriate. Thereafter, if Codeine Contin is to be continued after the patient recovers from the 
post-operative period a new dosage should be administered in accordance with the changed need 
for pain relief. The risk of withdrawal in opioid-tolerant patients should be addressed as 
clinically indicated. 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 11 of 45 
 
 
The administration of analgesics in the peri-operative period should be managed by healthcare 
providers with adequate training and experience (e.g., by an anesthesiologist).  
 
Codeine and other morphine-like opioids have been shown to decrease bowel motility. Ileus is a 
common post-operative complication, especially after intra-abdominal surgery with opioid 
analgesia. Caution should be taken to monitor for decreased bowel motility in post-operative 
patients receiving opioids. Standard supportive therapy should be implemented. 
 
Codeine Contin should not be used in the early post-operative period (12 to 24 hours post-
surgery) unless the patient is ambulatory and gastrointestinal function is normal.  
Psychomotor Impairment 
Codeine Contin may impair the mental and/or physical abilities needed for certain potentially 
hazardous activities such as driving a car or operating machinery. Patients should be cautioned 
accordingly. Patients should also be cautioned about the combined effects of codeine with other 
CNS depressants, including other opioids, phenothiazine, sedative/hypnotics and alcohol. 
Respiratory 
Respiratory Depression: Serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression has been 
reported with the use of opioids, even when used as recommended. Respiratory depression from 
opioid use, if not immediately recognized and treated, may lead to respiratory arrest and death. 
Management of respiratory depression may include close observation, supportive measures, and 
use of opioid antagonists, depending on the patient’s clinical status. Codeine should be used with 
extreme caution in patients with substantially decreased respiratory reserve, pre-existing 
respiratory depression, hypoxia or hypercapnia (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).   
 
While serious, life-threatening, or fatal respiratory depression can occur at any time during the 
use of Codeine Contin, the risk is greatest during the initiation of therapy or following a dose 
increase. Patients should be closely monitored for respiratory depression when initiating therapy 
with Codeine Contin and following dose increases. 
 
Life-threatening respiratory depression is more likely to occur in the elderly, cachectic, or 
debilitated patients because they may have altered pharmacokinetics or altered clearance 
compared to younger, healthier patients.  
 
To reduce the risk of respiratory depression, proper dosing and titration of Codeine Contin are 
essential. Overestimating the Codeine Contin dose when converting patients from another 
opioid product can result in a fatal overdose with the first dose. In these patients, the use of non-
opioid analgesics should be considered, if feasible (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, 
Special Populations, Special Risk Groups, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).  
 
Respiratory depression and death have occurred in children who received codeine in the 
postoperative period following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy and had evidence of being 
ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine (i.e., multiple copies of the gene for cytochrome P450 
isoenzyme 2D6 or high morphine concentrations).Children with obstructive sleep apnea who are 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 12 of 45 
 
 
treated with codeine for post-tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy pain may be particularly 
sensitive to the respiratory depressant effects of codeine that has been rapidly metabolized to 
morphine. Codeine-containing products are contraindicated for post-operative pain management 
in all pediatric patients undergoing tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy for obstructive sleep 
apnea syndrome (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).  
 
Use in Patients with Chronic Pulmonary Disease: Monitor patients with significant chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease or cor pulmonale, and patients having a substantially decreased 
respiratory reserve, hypoxia, hypercapnia, or preexisting respiratory depression for respiratory 
depression, particularly when initiating therapy and titrating with Codeine Contin, as in these 
patients, even usual therapeutic doses of Codeine Contin may decrease respiratory drive to the 
point of apnea. In these patients, use of alternative non-opioid analgesics should be considered, if 
possible.  The use of Codeine Contin is contraindicated in Patients with acute or severe 
bronchial asthma, chronic obstructive airway, or status asthmaticus (see 
CONTRAINDICATIONS). 
Patient Counselling Information 
A patient information sheet should be provided when Codeine Contin tablets are dispensed to the 
patient. 
 
Patients receiving Codeine Contin should be given the following instructions by the physician: 
 
1. Patients should be informed that accidental ingestion or use by individuals (including 
children) other than the patient for whom it was originally prescribed, may lead to severe, 
even fatal, consequences. 
 
2. Patients should be advised that Codeine Contin contains codeine, an opioid pain medicine. 
 
3. Patients should be advised that Codeine Contin should only be taken as directed.  The 
dose of Codeine Contin should not be adjusted without consulting with a physician.  If 
pain occurs between doses, do not take an extra dose of Codeine Contin as this could be 
dangerous.   
 
4. Codeine Contin must be swallowed whole (not broken, chewed, dissolved or crushed) due 
to the risk of fatal codeine overdose. For three of the four dose strengths (100 mg, 150 mg, 
and 200 mg), the tablet is scored and may be broken in half.  
 
5. Patients should be advised to report episodes of pain and adverse experiences occurring 
during therapy.  Individualization of dosage is essential to make optimal use of this 
medication. 
 
6. Patients should not combine Codeine Contin with alcohol or other central nervous system 
depressants (sleep aids, tranquilizers) because dangerous additive effects may occur 
resulting in serious injury or death. 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 13 of 45 
 
 
7. Patients should be advised to consult their physician or pharmacist if other medications are 
being used or will be used with Codeine Contin. 
 
8. Patients should be advised that if they have been receiving treatment with Codeine Contin 
and cessation of therapy is indicated, it may be appropriate to taper the Codeine Contin 
dose, rather than abruptly discontinue it, due to the risk of precipitating withdrawal 
symptoms. 
 
9. Patients should be advised of the most common adverse reactions that may occur while 
taking Codeine Contin:  constipation, dizziness, light-headedness, nausea, sedation, 
sweating and vomiting.  
 
10. Patients should be advised that Codeine Contin may cause drowsiness, dizziness, or light-
headedness and may impair mental and/or physical ability required for the performance of 
potentially hazardous tasks (e.g., driving, operating machinery).  Patients started on 
Codeine Contin or patients whose dose has been adjusted should be advised not to drive a 
car or operate machinery unless they are tolerant to the effects of Codeine Contin. 
 
11. Patients should be advised that Codeine Contin is a potential drug of abuse. They should 
protect it from theft or misuse. 
 
12. Patients should be advised that Codeine Contin should never be given to anyone other 
than the individual for whom it was prescribed. 
 
13. Patients should be advised that the maximum daily dose of Codeine Contin is 300 mg 
every 12 hours, and only for individuals tolerant to the effect of equivalent doses of 
opioids. 
 
14. Women of childbearing potential who become or are planning to become pregnant should 
be advised to consult a physician prior to initiating or continuing therapy with Codeine 
Contin. Women who are breast-feeding or pregnant should not use Codeine Contin.   
Sexual Function / Reproduction 
Long-term use of opioids may be associated with decreased sex hormone levels and symptoms 
such as low libido, erectile dysfunction, or infertility (see ADVERSE REACTIONS, Post-
Marketing Experience) 
Special Populations 
Special Risk Groups: Codeine should be administered with caution to patients with a history of 
alcohol and drug abuse and in a reduced dosage to debilitated patients, and in patients with 
severely impaired pulmonary function, Addison’s disease, hypothyroidism, myxedema, toxic 
psychosis, prostatic hypertrophy or urethral stricture. 
 
Pregnant Women:  Codeine Contin is contraindicated in patients who are pregnant. Studies in 
humans have not been conducted. Codeine Contin crosses the placental barrier and should not 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 14 of 45 
 
 
be administered to pregnant women unless in the judgement of the physician, potential benefits 
outweigh the risks.  
 
Prolonged maternal use of opioids during pregnancy can result in withdrawal signs in the 
neonate. Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome (NOWS), unlike opioid withdrawal syndrome 
in adults, may be life-threatening (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Neonatal Opioid 
Withdrawal Syndrome (NOWS), ADVERSE REACTIONS). 
 
Pregnant women using opioids should not discontinue their medication abruptly as this can cause 
pregnancy complication such as miscarriage or still-birth. Tapering should be slow and under 
medical supervision to avoid serious adverse events to the fetus.    
 
Labour, Delivery and Nursing Women: Since opioids can cross the placental barrier and also 
excreted in breast milk. Codeine Contin is contraindicated during labour, delivery, pregnancy 
and in nursing mothers. Life-threatening respiratory depression may occur in the infant if opioids 
are administered to the mother. Naloxone, a drug that counters the effects of opioids should be 
readily available if Codeine Contin is used in this population. 
 
Nursing Women: Codeine Contin is contraindicated in women who are breast-feeding (see 
CONTRAINDICATIONS). Codeine is secreted into human milk.  In women with normal 
codeine metabolism (normal CYP2D6 activity), the amount of codeine secreted into human milk 
is low and dose-dependent.  However, some women are ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine 
(see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Metabolism, Risk of Death in Ultra-Rapid 
Metabolizers of Codeine).  These women achieve higher-than-expected serum levels of 
codeine’s active metabolite, morphine, leading to higher-than-expected levels of morphine 
in breast milk and potentially dangerously high serum morphine levels in their breast-fed 
infants.  Mothers using codeine should be informed about when to seek immediate medical 
care and how to identify the signs and symptoms of neonatal toxicity, such as drowsiness or 
sedation, difficulty breast-feeding, breathing difficulties, and decreased tone, in their baby.  
Therefore, maternal use of codeine can potentially lead to serious adverse reactions, 
including death in nursing infants. 
 
Since there is a risk of infant exposure to  codeine and morphine through breast milk, Codeine 
Contin is contraindicated in breast-feeding. Prescribers should closely monitor mother-infant pairs 
and notify treating paediatricians about any use of codeine during breast-feeding. 
 
Pediatrics (< 18 years of age): Some children may be ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine (see 
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Metabolism, Risk of Death in Ultra-Rapid 
Metabolizers of Codeine). Regardless of clinical setting, codeine (including Codeine Contin) 
should not be used in children below the age of 12 years because of the risk of opioid toxicity 
due to the variable and unpredictable metabolism of codeine to morphine. Codeine Contin has 
not been studied in the pediatric population, therefore the use of Codeine Contin is not 
recommended in patients over 12 and under 18 years of age.  
 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 15 of 45 
 
 
Geriatrics (> 65 years of age):  In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be 
cautious, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, and titrated slowly reflecting the 
greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or 
other drug therapy (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). 
 
“In Vitro” Dissolution Studies of Interaction with Alcohol 
Increasing concentrations of alcohol in the dissolution medium resulted in a slight decrease in the 
rate of release of codeine from Codeine Contin tablets.  
 
Patients with Hepatic Impairment: No formal studies have been conducted in patients with 
hepatic impairment so the pharmacokinetics of codeine in this patient population are unknown. 
Start these patients cautiously with lower doses of Codeine Contin or with longer dosing 
intervals and titrate slowly while carefully monitoring for side effects. Dosage reduction is 
recommended in severe hepatic impairment due to the risk of toxicity. 
Patients with Renal Impairment: Dosage reduction is recommended in severe renal 
impairment due to the risk of toxicity (see ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
Special Populations and Conditions, Renal Impairment).  
 
Codeine pharmacokinetics may be altered in patients with renal failure. Clearance may be 
decreased and the metabolites may accumulate to much higher plasma levels in patients with 
renal failure as compared to patients with normal renal function. Start these patients cautiously 
with lower doses of Codeine Contin or with longer dosing intervals and titrate slowly while 
carefully monitoring for side effects. 
 
ADVERSE REACTIONS 
Adverse Drug Reaction Overview 
Adverse effects of Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets) are similar to those of 
other opioid analgesics and represent an extension of pharmacological effects of the drug class.  
The major hazards of opioids include respiratory and central nervous system depression and to a 
lesser degree, circulatory depression, respiratory arrest, shock and cardiac arrest. 
 
The most frequently observed adverse effects are constipation, dizziness, light-headedness, 
nausea, sedation, sweating and vomiting. 
 
Sedation:  Sedation is a common side effect of opioid analgesics, especially in opioid naïve 
individuals. Sedation may also occur partly because patients often recuperate from prolonged 
fatigue after the relief of persistent pain.  Most patients develop tolerance to the sedative effects 
of opioids within three to five days and, if the sedation is not severe, will not require any 
treatment except reassurance.  If excessive sedation persists beyond a few days, the dose of the 
opioid should be reduced and alternate causes investigated.  Some of these are: concurrent CNS 
depressant medication, hepatic or renal dysfunction, brain metastases, hypercalcemia and 
respiratory failure.   If it is necessary to reduce the dose, it can be carefully increased again after 
three or four days if it is obvious that the pain is not being well controlled.  Dizziness and 
unsteadiness may be caused by postural hypotension, particularly in elderly or debilitated 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 16 of 45 
 
 
patients, and may be alleviated if the patient lies down.   
 
Nausea and Vomiting:  Nausea is a common side effect on initiation of therapy with opioid 
analgesics and is thought to occur by activation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone, stimulation of 
the vestibular apparatus and through delayed gastric emptying.  The prevalence of nausea 
declines following continued treatment with opioid analgesics.  When instituting therapy with an 
opioid for chronic pain, the routine prescription of an antiemetic should be considered. In the 
cancer patient, investigation of nausea should include such causes as constipation, bowel 
obstruction, uremia, hypercalcemia, hepatomegaly, tumor invasion of celiac plexus and 
concurrent use of drugs with emetogenic properties.  Persistent nausea which does not respond to 
dosage reduction may be caused by opioid-induced gastric stasis and may be accompanied by 
other symptoms including anorexia, early satiety, vomiting and abdominal fullness.  These 
symptoms respond to chronic treatment with gastrointestinal prokinetic agents. 
 
Constipation:  Practically all patients become constipated while taking opioids on a chronic 
basis.  In some patients, particularly the elderly or bedridden, fecal impaction may result.  It is 
essential to caution the patients in this regard and to institute an appropriate regimen of bowel 
management at the start of prolonged opioid therapy.  Stimulant laxatives, stool softeners and 
other appropriate measures should be used as required.  As fecal impaction may present as 
overflow diarrhea, the presence of constipation should be excluded in patients on opioid therapy 
prior to initiating treatment for diarrhea. 
 
The following adverse effects occur less frequently with Codeine Contin and opioid analgesics, 
whether related or not to codeine controlled release tablets.  
 
Less Frequently Observed with Opioid Analgesics: 
Dermatologic: diaphoresis, other skin rashes, pruritus and urticaria 
Cardiovascular: bradycardia, chills, faintness, flushing of the face, hypertension, 
hypotension, palpitation, syncope and tachycardia 
Gastrointestinal anorexia, biliary tract spasm, cramps, diarrhea, dry mouth and taste 
alterations 
General and CNS:
  
agitation, alterations of mood (nervousness, apprehension, depression, 
floating feelings, dreams), blurred vision, diplopia and miosis, 
dysphoria, euphoria, headache, insomnia, increased intracranial 
pressure, muscle rigidity, muscle tremor, nystagmus, paresthesia, 
transient hallucinations and disorientation, tremors, uncoordinated 
muscle movements, visual disturbances and weakness 
Genitourinary: antidiuretic effects, urinary retention or hesitancy 
Respiratory: bronchospasm and laryngospasm 
 
 
Post-Marketing Experience  
Androgen deficiency: Chronic use of opioids may influence the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 17 of 45 
 
 
axis, leading to androgen deficiency that may manifest as low libido, impotence, erectile 
dysfunction, amenorrhea, or infertility. The causal role of opioids in the clinical syndrome of 
hypogonadism is unknown because the various medical, physical, lifestyle, and psychological 
stressors that may influence gonadal hormone levels have not been adequately controlled for in 
studies conducted to date. Patients presenting with symptoms of androgen deficiency should 
undergo laboratory evaluation. 
 
DRUG INTERACTIONS 
Overview 
Interactions with Central nervous System (CNS) Depressants (including benzodiazepines 
and alcohol:   
Due to additive pharmacologic effect, the concomitant use of benzodiazepines or other CNS 
depressants (e.g. other opioids, sedatives/hypnotics, antidepressants, anxiolytics, tranquilizers, 
muscle relaxants, general anesthetics, antipsychotics, phenothiazines, neuroleptics, 
antihistamines, antiemetics, and alcohol) and beta-blockers, increases the risk of respiratory 
depression, profound sedation, coma, and death. Reserve concomitant prescribing of these drugs 
for use in patients for whom alternative treatment options are inadequate. Limit dosages and 
durations to the minimum required. Follow patients closely for signs of respiratory depression 
and sedation (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Neurologic, Interactions with CNS 
Depressants (including benzodiazepines and alcohol) and Psychomotor Impairment). 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets) should not be consumed with alcohol as it 
may increase the chance of experiencing dangerous side effects.  
Drug-Drug Interactions 
Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450 Isozymes: Codeine is converted to morphine by the 
hepatic cytochrome CYP2D6, hence its safety and efficacy is controlled by this polymorphism, 
and has a high degree of variability in humans. Given the higher potency of morphine relative to 
codeine, CYP2D6 activity levels have been associated with outcomes from codeine 
administration that range from an absence of effect to responses with the potential of serious 
medical consequences. 
 
Inhibitors of CYP2D6:  About 5-10 percent of Caucasians and 1 percent of Asians exhibit the 
poor metabolizer phenotype. However, a range of CYP2D6 activity levels, including very 
efficient metabolizers of codeine, have been documented (see WARNINGS AND 
PRECAUTIONS, Metabolism, Risk of Death in Ultra-Rapid Metabolizers of Codeine).   
 
Administration with Mixed Activity Agonist/Antagonist Opioids:  Mixed agonist/antagonist 
opioid analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, and buprenorphine) should be 
administered with caution to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a 
pure opioid agonist analgesic such as codeine.  In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist 
analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of codeine and/or may precipitate withdrawal 
symptoms in these patients. 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 18 of 45 
 
 
MAO Inhibitors: MAO Inhibitors intensify the effects of opioid drugs which can cause anxiety, 
confusion and decreased respiration. Codeine Contin is contraindicated in patients receiving 
MAO Inhibitors or who have taken them within the previous 14 days (see 
CONTRAINDICATIONS). 
 
Serotonergic Agents: Coadministration of codeine controlled release tablets with a serotonergic 
agent, such as a Selective Serotonin Re-uptake Inhibitor or a Serotonin Norepinephrine Re-
uptake Inhibitor, may increase the risk of serotonin syndrome, a potentially life-threatening 
condition (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Neurologic). 
 
Warfarin and Other Coumarin Anticoagulants:  Codeine may increase the anticoagulant 
activity of coumarin and other anticoagulants. 
Drug-Food Interactions 
In the presence of food, the extent of absorption of Codeine Contin is not significantly increased 
but peak concentrations are somewhat delayed, occurring at 3.9 - 4.5 hours post-dose. 
Drug-Herb Interactions 
Interactions with herbal products have not been established. 
Drug-Laboratory Interactions 
Interactions with laboratory tests have not been established. 
Drug-Lifestyle Interactions 
The concomitant use of alcohol should be avoided (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, 
General).  
 
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION 
All doses of opioids carry an inherent risk of fatal or non-fatal adverse events. This risk is 
increased with higher doses. For the management of chronic non-cancer, non-palliative 
pain, it is recommended that 600 mg (90 morphine milligram equivalent) daily of Codeine 
Contin
® (codeine controlled release tablets) not be exceeded. Each patient should be 
assessed for their risk prior to prescribing Codeine Contin, as the likelihood of 
experiencing serious adverse events can depend upon the type of opioid, duration of 
treatment, level of pain as well as the patient’s own level of tolerance. In addition, the level 
of pain should be assessed routinely to confirm the most appropriate dose and the need for 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 19 of 45 
 
 
further use of Codeine Contin (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION - Adjustment or 
Reduction of Dosage). 
 
Codeine Contin
 should only be used in patients for whom alternative treatment options are 
ineffective or not tolerated (e.g., non-opioid analgesics).  
 
Codeine Contin must be swallowed whole and should not be chewed, dissolved or crushed.  
Taking broken, chewed, dissolved or crushed tablets could lead to rapid release and 
absorption of a potentially fatal dose of codeine (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS). 
All strengths may be halved, except 50 mg. The half tablets must also be swallowed intact. 
 
Children under 12:  Regardless of clinical setting, codeine (including Codeine Contin) should 
not be used in children below the age of 12 years because of the risk of opioid toxicity due to the 
variable and unpredictable metabolism of codeine to morphine (see INDICATIONS).     
Dosing Considerations 
Codeine Contin (codeine controlled release tablets) should be used with caution within 12 hours 
pre-operatively but should not be used in the early post-operative period (12 to 24 hours post-
surgery) unless the patient is ambulatory and gastrointestinal function is normal (see WARNINGS 
AND PRECAUTIONS, Peri-operative Considerations). 
 
Codeine Contin is not indicated for rectal administration. 
 
Codeine Contin should not be used in individuals less than 18 years old. 
 
Codeine Contin may be taken with or without food with a glass of water. 
Recommended Dose and Dosage Adjustment 
Adults: Individual dosing requirements vary considerably based on each patient's age, weight, 
severity and cause of pain, and medical and analgesic history.   
 
Doses of Codeine Contin are expressed as codeine base.  Codeine phosphate formulations 
contain approximately 75% codeine base. Patients currently receiving oral immediate 
release formulations of plain codeine phosphate may be transferred to Codeine Contin at 
an approximately 25% lower total daily codeine dosage, equally divided into two 12 hourly 
Codeine Contin doses. 
 
Patients Not Receiving Opioids at the Time of Initiation of Codeine Treatment:  Patients 
with pain who are not currently receiving other opioid analgesics, or who are receiving fewer 
than four tablets per day of a codeine combination preparation, should be initiated at a dose of 
Codeine Contin 50 mg every 12 hours and the dose titrated as needed.   
 
Patients Currently Receiving Opioids: For patients who are currently receiving analgesic 
combinations of codeine phosphate and acetaminophen or acetylsalicylic acid (ASA.), Table 1 
provides a guide to the recommended initial and maintenance doses of Codeine Contin. 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 20 of 45 
 
 
 
Table 1:  Conversion from Acetaminophen (or ASA) plus Codeine Phosphate 
Combinations 
Number of 30 mg Codeine 
Combination Tablets per Day 
Initial Dose of 
Codeine Contin 
Maintenance Dose of 
Codeine Contin 
4 – 6 50 mg q12h 100 mg q12h 
7 – 9 100 mg q12h 150 mg q12h 
10 – 12 150 mg q12h 200 mg q12h 
>12 200 mg q12h as needed 
(maximum 300 mg q12h) 
 
For patients who are receiving an alternate opioid, the "oral codeine phosphate equivalent" of the 
analgesic presently being used should be determined. Having determined the total daily dosage 
of the present analgesic, Table 2 can be used to calculate the approximate daily oral codeine 
phosphate dosage that should provide equivalent analgesia. An approximately 25% lower dose of 
Codeine Contin should then be prescribed, to account for the change from codeine phosphate to 
codeine base. This dose should be equally divided into two 12 hourly doses.  Further dose 
reductions should also be considered due to incomplete cross-tolerance between opioids.   
 
Opioid Rotation: Conversion ratios for opioids are subject to variations in kinetics governed by 
genetics and other factors. When switching from one opioid to another, consider reducing the 
calculated dose by 25-50% to minimize the risk of overdose. Subsequently, up-titrate the dose, 
as required, to reach the appropriate maintenance dose. 
 
 
  
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 21 of 45 
 
 
 
Table 2: Opioid Conversion Tablea  
Opioids To convert to oral 
morphine 
equivalent 
To convert from 
oral morphine 
multiply by 
Daily 90 mg MEDb
Morphine 1 1 90 mg 
Codeine 0.15 6.67 600 mg 
Hydromorphone 5 0.2 18 mg 
Oxycodone 1.5 0.667 60 mg 
Tapentadol 0.3-0.4 2.5-3.33 300 mg 
Tramadol 0.1-0.2 6 *** 
Methadone             Morphine dose equivalence is not reliably established 
*** The maximum recommended daily dose of tramadol is 300 mg – 400 mg depending on the formulation. 
a. Adapted from the 2017 Canadian guideline for opioids for chronic non-cancer pain. McMaster University; 2017  
b. MED. Morphine Equivalent Dose  
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 22 of 45 
 
 
Patients with Hepatic Impairment: Start these patients cautiously with lower doses of Codeine 
Contin or with longer dosing intervals and titrate slowly while carefully monitoring for side 
effects. Dosage reduction is recommended in severe hepatic impairment due to the risk of 
toxicity (see ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY Special Populations and 
Conditions, Hepatic Impairment). 
 
Patients with Renal Impairment: Dosage reduction is recommended in severe renal 
impairment due to the risk of toxicity (see ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
Special Populations and Conditions, Renal Impairment). 
 
Clearance may be decreased and the metabolites may accumulate to much higher plasma levels 
in patients with renal failure as compared to patients with normal renal function. Start these 
patients cautiously with lower doses of Codeine Contin or with longer dosing intervals and 
titrate slowly while carefully monitoring for side effects. 
 
Geriatrics:  Respiratory depression has occurred in the elderly following administration of large 
initial doses of opioids to patients who were not opioid-tolerant or when opioids were co-
administered with other agents that can depress respiration. Codeine Contin should be initiated 
at a low dose and slowly titrated to effect (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS and 
ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).   
 
Use with Non-Opioid Medications:  If a non-opioid analgesic is being provided, it may be 
continued. If the non-opioid is discontinued, consideration should be given to increasing the 
opioid dose to compensate for the non-opioid analgesic. Codeine Contin can be safely used 
concomitantly with usual doses of other non-opioid analgesics.  
 
Dose Titration:  Dose titration is the key to success with opioid analgesic therapy.  Proper 
optimization of doses scaled to the relief of the patient's pain should aim at regular 
administration of the lowest dose of controlled release codeine (Codeine Contin) which will 
achieve the overall treatment goal of satisfactory pain relief with acceptable side effects.   
 
Dosage adjustments should be based on the patient's clinical response.  In patients receiving 
Codeine Contin chronically, the dose should be titrated at intervals of 48 hours to that which 
provides satisfactory pain relief without unmanageable side effects.  Doses of Codeine Contin 
above 300 mg q12h have not been extensively studied, and above these levels it is preferable that 
patients be transferred to an opioid such as morphine, which is recommended for severe pain.  
Codeine Contin is designed to allow 12 hourly dosing.  
 
If pain repeatedly occurs at the end of the dosing interval it is generally an indication for a 
dosage increase rather than more frequent administration of controlled release codeine 
(Codeine Contin).  
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 23 of 45 
 
 
Adjustment or Reduction of Dosage: Physical dependence with or without psychological 
dependence tends to occur with chronic administration of opioids, including Codeine Contin. 
Withdrawal (abstinence) symptoms may occur following abrupt discontinuation of therapy. 
These symptoms may include body aches, diarrhea, gooseflesh, loss of appetite, nausea, 
nervousness or restlessness, runny nose, sneezing, tremors or shivering, stomach cramps, 
tachycardia, trouble with sleeping, unusual increase in sweating, palpitations, unexplained fever, 
weakness and yawning.   
 
Following successful relief of pain, periodic attempts to reduce the opioid dose should be made.  
Smaller doses or complete discontinuation may become feasible due to a change in the patient's 
condition or mental state.   
 
Patients on prolonged therapy should be withdrawn gradually from the drug if it is no longer 
required for pain control. In patients who are appropriately treated with opioid analgesics and 
who undergo gradual withdrawal for the drug, these symptoms are usually mild (see 
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS). Tapering should be individualized and carried out under 
medical supervision. 
 
Patients should be informed that reducing and/or discontinuing opioids decreases their tolerance 
to these drugs. If treatment needs to be re-initiated, the patient must start at the lowest dose and 
titrate up to avoid overdose. 
 
Opioid analgesics may only be partially effective in relieving dysesthetic pain, postherpetic 
neuralgia, stabbing pains, activity-related pain and some forms of headache. That is not to say 
that patients suffering from some of these forms of chronic pain should not be given an adequate 
trial of opioid analgesics, but it may be necessary to refer such patients at an early time to other 
forms of pain therapy. 
 
Management of Patients Requiring Rescue Medication:  For patients whose dose has been 
titrated to the recommended maintenance dose, without attainment of adequate analgesia, the 
total daily dose may be increased, unless precluded by side effects. If episodes of pain are 
encountered with appropriate adjustments of the Codeine Contin dose, plain acetaminophen 
may be given (325-650 mg q4-6h p.r.n. to a maximum of 4,000 mg/24 hours). Fentanyl products 
should not be used as rescue medication in patients taking Codeine Contin. If immediate release 
codeine phosphate preparations or acetaminophen plus codeine phosphate combination 
analgesics  (q4-6h p.r.n.) are used for pain, the doses of codeine phosphate* are 15, 30, 45, 60, 
90 mg for patients receiving Codeine Contin 100, 200, 300, 400, 600 mg/day, respectively. 
  
(*based on a rescue medication dose of codeine base which should not exceed 
1/8 of the daily 
dose of Codeine Contin.) 
Missed Dose 
If the patient forgets to take one or more doses, they should take their next dose at the next 
scheduled time and in the normal amount. 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 24 of 45 
 
 
Disposal 
Codeine Contin should be kept in a safe place, such as under lock and out of the sight and reach 
of children before, during and after use. Codeine Contin should not be used in front of children, 
since they may copy these actions.  
 
Codeine Contin should never be disposed of in household trash. Disposal via a pharmacy 
take back program is recommended. Unused or expired Codeine Contin should be properly 
disposed of as soon as it is no longer needed to prevent accidental exposure to others, including 
children or pets. Codeine Contin should not be shared with others and steps should be taken to 
protect it from theft or misuse. The patient should speak to their pharmacist about temporary 
storage options, if required, until the medication can be returned to the pharmacy for safe 
disposal. 
 
OVERDOSAGE 
 
For management of a suspected drug overdose, contact your regional Poison Control Centre. 
 
Symptoms: Serious overdosage with opioids may be characterized by respiratory depression (a 
decrease in respiratory rate and/or tidal volume, Cheyne-Stokes respiration, cyanosis), dizziness, 
confusion, extreme somnolence progressing to stupor or coma, miosis, hypotonia, cold and 
clammy skin, and sometimes bradycardia and hypotension Severe overdose may result in apnea, 
circulatory collapse, cardiac arrest and death.  
 
Treatment:  Primary attention should be given to the establishment of adequate respiratory 
exchange through the provision of a patent airway and controlled or assisted ventilation.  The 
opioid antagonist naloxone hydrochloride is a specific antidote against respiratory depression 
due to overdosage or as a result of unusual sensitivity to opioids.  An appropriate dose of the 
antagonist should therefore be administered, preferably by the intravenous route.  The usual 
initial i.v. adult dose of naloxone is 0.4 mg or higher.  Concomitant efforts at respiratory 
resuscitation should be carried out.  Since the duration of action of opioids, particularly sustained 
release formulations, may exceed that of the antagonist, the patient should be under continued 
surveillance and doses of the antagonist should be repeated as needed to maintain adequate 
respiration. 
 
An antagonist should not be administered in the absence of clinically significant respiratory or 
cardiovascular depression.  Oxygen, intravenous fluids, vasopressors and other supportive 
measures should be used as indicated. 
 
In individuals physically dependent on opioids, the administration of the usual dose of opioid 
antagonist will precipitate an acute withdrawal syndrome.  The severity of this syndrome will 
depend on the degree of physical dependence and the dose of antagonist administered.  The use 
of opioid antagonists in such individuals should be avoided if possible.  If an opioid antagonist 
must be used to treat serious respiratory depression in the physically dependent patient, the 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 25 of 45 
 
 
antagonist should be administered with extreme care by using dosage titration, commencing with 
10 to 20% of the usual recommended initial dose. 
 
Evacuation of gastric contents may be useful in removing unabsorbed drug, particularly when a 
sustained release formulation has been taken. 
 
ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
Mechanism of Action 
Codeine is an opioid analgesic which exerts an agonist effect at specific, saturable opioid 
receptors in the CNS and other tissues.  In man, codeine produces a variety of effects including 
analgesia, constipation from decreased gastrointestinal motility, suppression of the cough reflex, 
respiratory depression from reduced responsiveness of the respiratory center to CO2, nausea and 
vomiting via stimulation of the CTZ, changes in mood including euphoria and dysphoria, 
sedation, mental clouding, miosis and alterations of the endocrine and autonomic nervous 
systems. 
Pharmacodynamics 
Cardiovascular System:  Codeine may produce release of histamine with or without associated 
peripheral vasodilation. Manifestations of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilatation may 
include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, hyperhidrosis and/or orthostatic hypotension. 
 
Central Nervous System: Codeine produces respiratory depression by direct action on brain 
stem respiratory centres. The respiratory depression involves both a reduction in the 
responsiveness of the brain stem centres to increases in CO
2 tension and to electrical stimulation. 
 
Codeine depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough centre in the medulla. 
Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually required for analgesia. 
 
Codeine causes miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but 
are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origin may produce 
similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with hypoxia in the setting of 
codeine overdose. 
 
Endocrine System: Opioids may influence the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal or -gonadal axes. 
Some changes that can be seen include an increase in serum prolactin, and decreases in plasma 
cortisol and testosterone. Clinical signs and symptoms may be manifest from these hormonal 
changes. 
 
Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle: Codeine causes a reduction in motility 
associated with an increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. 
Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. 
Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the point 
of spasm resulting in constipation. Other opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in 
gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions, spasm of the sphincter of Oddi, and transient elevations 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 26 of 45 
 
 
in serum amylase. 
   
Immune System: In vitro and animal studies indicate that opioids have a variety of effects on 
immune functions, depending on the context in which they are used. The clinical significance of 
these findings is unknown. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
Absorption: Codeine is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and has an oral 
bioavailability of 53%, relative to the intramuscular route.   
 
Codeine Contin
® (codeine controlled release tablets) is absorbed to an equivalent extent as 
immediate-release tablet or liquid formulations of codeine. In single dose studies in fasting, 
healthy volunteers, the maximum plasma codeine concentration (Cmax) is approximately 56% of 
that from immediate-release formulations and is achieved approximately 2.6 times later - at 3.3 
hours post-dosing.  In steady-state studies in healthy volunteers, both the extent of absorption 
and maximum plasma codeine concentrations are equivalent to those from immediate-release 
formulations at the same total daily dose.  In the presence of food, the extent of absorption of 
Codeine Contin is not significantly increased but peak concentrations are somewhat delayed, 
occurring at 3.9 - 4.5 hours post-dose. 
 
Distribution:  Codeine is rapidly distributed from blood to body tissues, passes the blood-brain 
barrier and is found in fetal tissue and breast milk.  Codeine is metabolized in the liver to 
morphine and norcodeine, each representing about 10% of the administered dose of codeine.  
 
Metabolism:  Codeine is metabolized in the liver to morphine and norcodeine, each representing 
about 10% of the administered dose of codeine. Codeine is converted to morphine by the hepatic 
cytochrome CYP2D6, hence its safety and efficacy is controlled by this polymorphism, and has a 
high degree of variability in humans. CYP2D6 activity levels have been associated with outcomes 
from codeine administration that range from an ab sence of effect to responses with the potential 
of serious medical consequences (see DRUG INTERACTIONS, Drug-Drug Interactions). 
 
Excretion:  Urinary excretion products are free and glucuronide-conjugated codeine (about 
70%), free and conjugated morphine (about 10%), normorphine (under 4%) and hydrocodone 
(<1%). The remainder of the dose appears in the feces. 
Special Populations and Conditions 
Pediatrics:  Some children may be ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine (see WARNINGS AND 
PRECAUTIONS, Metabolism, Risk of Death in Ultra-Rapid Metabolizers of Codeine). 
Regardless of clinical setting, codeine (including Codeine Contin) should not be used in children 
below the age of 12 years because of the risk of opioid toxicity due to the variable and 
unpredictable metabolism of codeine to morphine. Codeine Contin has not been studied in the 
pediatric population, therefore the use of Codeine Contin is not recommended in patients over 12 
and under 18 years of age. 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 27 of 45 
 
 
 
Geriatrics:  Codeine should be administered with caution, and in reduced dosages, to elderly or 
debilitated patients. Respiratory depression has occurred in the elderly following administration 
of large initial doses of opioids to patients who were not opioid-tolerant or when opioids were 
co-administered with other agents that can depress respiration. Codeine Contin should be 
initiated at a low dose and slowly titrated to effect (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS 
and ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY). 
 
Hepatic Impairment: As formal studies have not been conducted in patients with hepatic 
impairment, the pharmacokinetics of codeine in this patient population are unknown. Therefore, 
these patients should be started cautiously with lower doses of Codeine Contin or with longer 
dosing intervals and titrate slowly while carefully monitoring for side effects. Dosage reduction 
is recommended in severe hepatic impairment due to the risk of toxicity. 
 
Renal Impairment: Codeine pharmacokinetics may be altered in patients with renal failure. 
Clearance may be decreased and the metabolites may accumulate to much higher plasma levels 
in patients with renal failure as compared to patients with normal renal function. Start these 
patients cautiously with lower doses of Codeine Contin or with longer dosing intervals and 
titrate slowly while carefully monitoring for side effects. 
 
Gender:  No data available.   
 
Race:  About 5-10 percent of Caucasians and 1 percent of Asians exhibit the poor metabolizer 
phenotype and do not convert codeine to morphine sufficiently to benefit from the analgesic 
effect of the drug (see DRUG INTERACTIONS, Drug-Drug Interactions). However, some 
individuals may be ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine due to a specific CYP2D6 genotype.  
These individuals convert codeine into its active metabolite, morphine, more rapidly and 
completely than other people leading to higher-than-expected serum morphine levels.  The 
prevalence of this CYP2D6 phenotype varies widely and has been estimated at 0.5 to 1% in 
Chinese, Japanese and Hispanics, 1 to 10% in Caucasians, 3% in African Americans, and 16 to 
28% in North Africans, Ethiopians, and Arabs.  Data are not available for other ethnic groups 
(see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Special Populations, Nursing Women).  
 
Genetic Polymorphism:  Some individuals may be ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine due to a 
specific CYP2D6 genotype (see Special Populations and Conditions, Race above and 
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Special Populations, Nursing Women). 
 
STORAGE AND STABILITY 
Store at room temperature (15°C - 30°C). 
 
SPECIAL HANDLING INSTRUCTIONS 
Not applicable. 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 28 of 45 
 
 
DOSAGE FORMS, COMPOSITION AND PACKAGING 
Dosage Forms 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets) is available in 50 mg (blue), 100 mg 
(yellow), 150 mg (red) and 200 mg (orange) strengths.   
 
The tablets are film-coated with the following appearance: 
 
50 mg - Blue, round, film coated tablets with  PF imprinted on one side and CC 50 on the other 
side. 
100 mg  - Yellow, round, scored film coated ta blets with PF imprinted on one side and CC 100 
on the other side. 
150 mg  - Red, round, scored film coated tabl ets with PF imprinted on one side and CC 150 on 
the other side. 
200 mg  - Orange, caplet shaped, scored film co ated tablets with PF imprinted on one side and 
CC 200 on the other side. 
 
Composition 
Codeine Contin 50 mg tablets contain 26.5 mg of codeine monohydrate and 31.35 mg of 
codeine sulfate trihydrate (each equivalent to 25 mg codeine anhydrous).   
 
Codeine Contin 100 mg tablets contain 53 mg of codeine monohydrate and 62.7 mg of codeine 
sulfate trihydrate (each equivalent to 50 mg codeine anhydrous).   
 
Codeine Contin 150 mg tablets contain 79.5 mg of codeine monohydrate and 94.1 mg of 
codeine sulfate trihydrate (each equivalent to 75 mg codeine anhydrous).   
 
Codeine Contin 200 mg tablets contain 106 mg of codeine monohydrate and 125.4 mg of 
codeine sulfate trihydrate (each equivalent to 100 mg codeine anhydrous).   
 
Non-medicinal ingredients (all tablet strengths): hydroxyethyl cellulose, hydroxypropyl 
cellulose, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, lactose, magnesium stearate, polyethylene glycol, 
stearyl alcohol, talc and titanium dioxide. 
 
In addition, the tablet strengths listed below contain the following dyes:  
50 mg - FD&C Blue No. 2 Aluminum Lake 
100 mg - D&C Yellow No. 10 Aluminum Lake, FD&C Yellow No. 6 Aluminum Lake 
150 mg - FD&C Yellow No. 6 Aluminum Lake, FD&C Red No. 40 Aluminum Lake 
200 mg - FD&C Yellow No. 6 Aluminum Lake 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 29 of 45 
 
 
Packaging 
Supplied in opaque, plastic bottles containing 50 or 60 tablets.  
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 30 of 45 
 
 
PART II: SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 
 
PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION 
Drug Substance(s) 
 
Proper Name:  Codeine Monohydrate 
 
Chemical Name:     7, 8-Didehydro-4, 5 α-epoxy-3-methoxy-17-methylmorphinan-6α-ol 
monohydrate 
 
Molecular Formula and Molecular Mass:   C
18H21NO3 • H2O / 317.38 
 
Structural Formula:    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physicochemical Properties:   
 
Appearance:   Colourless or white crysta ls or white, crystalline powder.   
 
Solubility: Slightly soluble in water, very solu ble in chloroform and freely soluble in ether. 
 
Melting Point: 154° - 158°C. 
 
 
  

Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 31 of 45 
 
 
Proper Name: Codeine Sulfate Trihydrate 
 
Chemical Name:     7, 8-Didehydro-4, 5 α-epoxy-3-methoxy-17-methylmorphinan-6α-ol 
sulfate trihydrate 
 
Molecular Formula and Molecular Mass:   (C
18H21NO3)2• H2SO4 •3H20 / 750.87 
 
Structural Formula:    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physicochemical Properties:   
 
Appearance:  White crystals or white, crystalline powder.   
 
Solubility:  Slightly soluble in water, free ly soluble in water at 80°C, very slightly 
soluble in alcohol, insoluble in chloroform and in ether. 
 
Melting Point:  278°C (anhydrous) 
 
 

Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 32 of 45 
 
 
CLINICAL TRIALS 
The analgesic efficacy of Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets) has been 
evaluated in multiple dose studies in patients with cancer pain and chronic non-malignant pain. 
In a dose-response study in cancer patients, Codeine Contin 150 mg every 12 hours provided 
approximately equivalent analgesia to 600 mg acetaminophen plus 60 mg codeine every 6 hours.  
In patients with cancer pain and chronic non-malignant pain receiving q4h p.r.n. acetaminophen 
plus codeine, Codeine Contin (100, 150 or 200 mg every 12 hours) produced improved pain 
control and reduced consumption of supplementary acetaminophen plus codeine.  In patients 
with chronic low back pain, Codeine Contin (100 mg every 12 hours), supplemented with p.r.n. 
plain acetaminophen, produced lower pain scores and less fluctuation in pain throughout the day 
than p.r.n. acetaminophen plus codeine. 
 
DETAILED PHARMACOLOGY 
Pharmacodynamics 
Codeine and related opioids produce their major effects on the CNS and bowel by acting as 
agonists at specific saturable opioid receptors in the CNS and other tissues, particularly at the mµ 
receptors.  The mechanism of action of opioids for analgesia is not at peripheral loci but rather at 
the level of the spinal cord and higher nerve centers where they are thought to alter the 
transmission of nerve impulses.  The antitussive properties of codeine may be exerted not 
through the mµ receptors but other receptors that are not naloxone sensitive.  
 
It has been speculated that the analgesic effectiveness of codeine is mediated partially by 
morphine, which is a metabolite of codeine.  However, recent studies identifying endogenous 
formation of codeine and binding of codeine and its metabolites to mu receptors are supportive 
of an analgesic effect of codeine itself.  
 
Orally administered codeine is approximately 60% as potent as intramuscular codeine in terms of 
total analgesia. The relative potency of codeine phosphate administered intramuscularly is 
approximately 
1/12 that of intramuscularly administered morphine sulfate and orally, 200 mg of 
codeine phosphate is equivalent to 20 - 30 mg of morphine sulfate during chronic dosing. 
 
MICROBIOLOGY 
Not applicable. 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 33 of 45 
 
 
TOXICOLOGY 
Animal 
The LD50 of oral codeine in mice and rats, as determined by 15 different investigators, was 
between 237-640 mg/kg.  Animal studies with a number of opioids, including codeine, have 
indicated the possibility of teratogenic effect.  No adequate long-term studies have been 
conducted in animals to determine whether codeine has a potential for carcinogenesis. 
Human 
Codeine toxicity may result from overdosage but because of great interindividual variation in 
sensitivity to opioids it is difficult to determine the exact dose of any opioid that is toxic or 
lethal. 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 34 of 45 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Arkinstall W, Sandler A, Goughnour B, Babul N, Harsanyi Z, Darke AC.  Efficacy of 
controlled release codeine in chronic nonmalignant pain:  A randomized, placebo-
controlled clinical trial.  Pain 1995;62:169-78. 
 
2. Band CJ, Band PR, Deschamps M, Besner J-G, Coldman AJ.  Human pharmacokinetic 
study of immediate-release (codeine phosphate) and sustained-release (Codeine Contin) 
codeine.  J Clin Pharmacol 1994;34:938-43. 
 
3. Beaver WT, Wallenstein SL, Rogers A, Houde RW.  Analgesic studies of codeine and 
oxycodone in patients with cancer. I.  Comparisons of oral with intramuscular codeine 
and of oral with intramuscular oxycodone. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1978;207(1):92-100. 
 
4. Chary S, Goughnour BR, Moulin DE, Thorpe WR, Harsanyi Z, Darke AC.  The dose-
response relationship of controlled-release codeine (Codeine Contin) in chronic cancer 
pain.  J Pain Symptom Manage 1994;9:363-71. 
 
5. Chau TT, Carter FE, Harris LS. 3H-Codeine binding in the guinea pig lower brain stem. 
Pharmacology 1982; 25:12-17. 
 
6. Dhaliwal HS, Sloan P, Arkinstall WW, Thirlwell MP, Babul N, Harsanyi Z, et al.  
Randomized evaluation of controlled-release codeine and placebo in chronic cancer pain.  
J Pain Symptom Manage 1995;10:612-23. 
 
7. Eddy NB, Friebel H, Hahn K, Halbach H. Codeine and its alternates for pain and cough 
relief.  Bull WHO 1968;38:673-741. 
 
8. Findlay JWA, Butz RF, Welch RM. Specific radioimmunoassays for codeine and 
morphine. Metabolism of codeine to morphine in the rat.  Res Commun Chem Pathol 
Pharmacol 1977;17(4):595-603. 
 
9. Findlay JWA, Butz RF, Welch RM. Codeine kinetics as determined by 
radioimmunoassay.  Clin Pharmacol Ther 1977;22(4):439-46. 
 
10. Findlay JWA, Jones EC, Butz RF, Welch RM.  Plasma codeine and morphine 
concentrations after therapeutic oral doses of codeine-containing analgesics. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther 1978;24(1):60-8. 
 
11. Guay DRP, Awni WM, Halstenson CE, Findlay JW, Opsahl JA, Abraham PA, et al.  
Pharmacokinetics of codeine after single-and multiple-oral-dose administration to normal 
volunteers.  J Clin Pharmacol 1987;27:983-7. 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 35 of 45 
 
 
12. Hale ME, Speight KL, Harsanyi Z, Iwan T, Slagle S, Lacouture PG, Darke AC.  Efficacy 
of 12 hourly controlled-release codeine compared with as required dosing of 
acetaminophen plus codeine in patients with chronic low back pain.  Pain Res Manage 
1997; 2:33-8. 
 
13. Hull JH, Findlay JW, Rogers JF, Welch RM, Butz RF, Bustrack JA.  An evaluation of the 
effects of smoking on codeine pharmacokinetics and bioavailability in normal human 
volunteers.  Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1982;16:849-50. 
 
14. Jaffe JH, Martin WR.  Narcotic analgesics and antagonists. In: Goodman LS, Gilman A, 
eds. The pharmacological basis of therapeutics, 5th ed, New York: Macmillan Press, 
1975:245. 
 
15. Kay DC, Gorodetzky CW, Martin WR.  Comparative effects of codeine and morphine in 
man.  J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1967;156(1):101-6. 
 
16. Portenoy RK.  Chronic opioid therapy in non-malignant pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 
1990;5:S46-S62. 
 
17. Portenoy RK, Foley KM, Inturissi CE.  The nature of opioid responsiveness and its 
implication for neuropathic pain:  New hypotheses derived from studies of opioid 
infusions.  Pain 1990;43:273-86. 
 
18. Portenoy RK.  Cancer Pain:  Pathophysiology and syndromes.  Lancet 1992;339:1026-31. 
 
19. Quiding H, Oikarinen V, Sane J, Sjõblad A-M.  Analgesic efficacy after single and 
repeated doses of codeine and acetaminophen.  J Clin Pharmacol 1984;24:27-34. 
 
20. Quiding H, Anderson P, Bondesson U, Boréus LO, Hynning P-Å.  Plasma concentrations 
of codeine and its metabolite, morphine, after single and repeated oral administration.  
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1986;30:673-7. 
 
21. Quiding H, Lundqvist G, Boreus LO, Bondesson U, Ohrvik J.  Analgesic effect and 
plasma concentrations of codeine and morphine after two dose levels of codeine 
following oral surgery.  Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1993;44:319-23. 
 
22. Scott JF, ed. Cancer Pain: A Monograph on the Management of Cancer Pain: Ministry of 
Supply and Services Canada. 1984 Cat. No. H42-2/5-1984E. 
 
23. Sunshine A, Laska EM, Olsen NZ.  Analgesic effects of oral oxycodone and codeine in 
the treatment of patients with postoperative, postfracture, or somatic pain.  In:  Foley KM 
and Inturrisi CE., eds.  Advances in pain research and therapy.  Vol. 8.  Raven Press, 
New York, 1986;225-34.
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 36 of 45 
 
 
READ THIS FOR SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF YOUR MEDICINE 
PATIENT MEDICATION INFORMATION 
NCodeine Contin® 
Codeine Controlled Release Tablets 
 
Read this carefully before you start taking Codeine Contin and each time you get a refill. 
This leaflet is a summary and will not tell  you everything about this drug. Talk to your 
healthcare professional about your medical cond ition and treatment and ask if there is any 
new information about Codeine Contin. 
 
Serious Warnings and Precautions 
 
 Even if you take Codeine Contin as prescribed you are at a risk for opioid addiction, 
abuse and misuse. This can lead to overdose and death. To understand your risk of 
opioid addiction, abuse, and misuse you should speak to your prescriber (e.g., doctor).
 
 Life-threatening breathing problems while taking Codeine Contin, especially if not 
taken as directed. Babies are at risk of life-threatening breathing problems if their 
mothers take opioids while pregnant or nursing.   
 Never give anyone your Codeine Contin. They could die from taking it. If a person 
has not been prescribed Codeine Contin, taking even one dose can cause a fatal 
overdose. This is especially true for children. 
 
 If you took Codeine Contin while you were pregnant, whether for short or long 
periods of time or in small or large doses, your baby can suffer life-threatening 
withdrawal symptoms after birth. This can occur in the days after birth and for up to 
4 weeks after delivery. If your baby has any of the following symptoms: 
o has changes in their breathing (such as weak, difficult or fast breathing) 
o is unusually difficult to comfort  
o has tremors (shakiness) 
o has increased stools, sneezing, yawning, vomiting, or fever 
      Seek immediate medical help for your baby. 
 
 Taking Codeine Contin with other opioid medicines, benzodiazepines, alcohol, or 
other central nervous system depressants (including street drugs) can cause severe 
drowsiness, decreased awareness, breathing problems, coma, and death. 
 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 37 of 45 
 
 
What is Codeine Contin used for? 
 
Codeine Contin is a medicine used to manage your pain.  
Codeine Contin is NOT used (“as needed”) to treat pain that you only have once in a while.  
 
How does Codeine Contin work? 
 
Codeine Contin contains codeine which is a pain medication belonging to the class of drugs 
known as opioids which includes fentanyl, hydromorphone, morphine and oxycodone. It relieves 
pain by acting on specific nerve cells of the spinal cord and brain. 
 
What are the ingredients in Codeine Contin? 
 
Medicinal ingredient: codeine 
 
Non-medicinal ingredients (all tablet strengths): hydroxyethyl cellulose, hydroxypropyl 
cellulose, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, lactose, magnesium stearate, polyethylene glycol, 
stearyl alcohol, talc and titanium dioxide. 
 
In addition, the tablet strengths listed below contain the following dyes:  
50 mg - FD&C Blue No. 2 Aluminum Lake 
100 mg - D&C Yellow No. 10 Aluminum Lake, FD&C Yellow No. 6 Aluminum Lake 
150 mg - FD&C Yellow No. 6 Aluminum Lake, FD&C Red No. 40 Aluminum Lake 
200 mg - FD&C Yellow No. 6 Aluminum Lake 
 
Codeine Contin comes in the following dosage forms: 
 
Codeine Contin Controlled Release Tablets: 50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg and 200 mg.  
 
Do not use Codeine Contin if:    
 
 your doctor did not prescribe for you 
 you are allergic to codeine, other opioids, or any of the other ingredients in Codeine 
Contin 
 you have mild or short term pain that  can be controlled  by the occasional use of  pain 
medications, including those available without a prescription  
 you have severe asthma, trouble breathing, or other  lung problems 
 you have a condition where the small bowel does not work properly (paralytic ileus) or you 
have severe pain in your abdomen  
 you have a head injury  
 you are at risk for seizures 
 you suffer from alcoholism 
 you are going to have, or recently had, a planned surgery 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 38 of 45 
 
 
 you are taking or have taken within the past 2 weeks a monoamine oxidase inhibitor  
(such as phenelzine sulfate, tranylcypromine sulfate, moclobemide or selegiline)   
 you had surgery within the last 12-24 hours or are going to have a planned surgery 
 you are pregnant or planning to become pregnant, or in labour 
 you are breastfeeding. The use of codeine-containing products while breast-feeding may 
harm your baby.   If you breastfeed and take Codeine Contin  seek immediate medical 
care for your baby if they are overly drowsy, sedated, have difficulty breast-feeding, have 
breathing difficulties, and are floppy (have decreased muscle tone). This is very serious 
for the baby and can lead to death. Tell the baby’s doctor that you are breastfeeding and 
took Codeine Contin. 
 you are under 12 years of age 
 you are under 18 years old and are having (or have recently had) your tonsils or adenoids 
removed because of frequent interruption of breathing during sleep 
 
To help avoid side effects and ensure proper use, talk to your healthcare professional 
before you take Codeine Contin. Talk about any health conditions or problems you may 
have, including if you: 
 
 have a history of illicit or prescription drug or alcohol abuse 
 have severe kidney, liver, lung disease 
 have heart disease 
 have low blood pressure 
 have past or current depression 
 suffer from chronic or severe constipation 
 have problems with your thyroid, adrenal or prostate gland 
 have, or had in the past hallucinations or other severe mental problems 
 suffer from migraines 
 are planning to become pregnant  
 
Other warnings you should know about: 
 
Some people metabolize codeine at a much faster rate than the general population, which 
may lead to accidental overdose, if this should happen to you, seek help immediately (see 
Overdose, for symptoms of overdose and what to do if it happens). If you know that you 
metabolize codeine rapidly, tell your doctor BEFORE starting this medication. 
 
Codeine Contin is not recommended for anyone who has or is at risk for breathing problems 
such as: 
 lung infections, or respiratory conditions 
 neuromuscular disorders 
 severe heart problems 
 recent multiple traumas or extensive surgical procedures 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 39 of 45 
 
 
 
 
Opioid dependence and addiction: There are important differences between physical 
dependence and addiction. It is important that you talk to your doctor if you have questions or 
concerns about abuse, addiction or physical dependence. 
 
Pregnancy, nursing, labour and delivery: Do not use Codeine Contin while pregnant, 
nursing, during labour or delivery.  Opioids can be transferred to your baby through breast milk, 
or while still in the womb. Codeine Contin can then cause life-threatening breathing problems 
in your unborn baby or nursing infant. 
 
Driving and using machines: Before you do tasks which may require special attention, you 
should wait until you know how you react to Codeine Contin. Codeine Contin can cause: 
 drowsiness 
 dizziness or 
 light headedness  
This can usually occur after you take your first dose and when your dose is increased. 
 
Disorder of the adrenal gland: You may develop a disorder of the adrenal gland called adrenal 
insufficiency.  This means that your adrenal gland is not making enough of certain hormones.  
You may experience symptoms such as: 
 nausea, vomiting 
 feeling tired, weak or dizzy 
 decreased appetite 
 
You may be more likely to have problems with your adrenal gland if you have been taking 
opioids for longer than one month.  Your doctor may do tests, give you another medication, and 
slowly take you off Codeine Contin. 
 
Serotonin Syndrome: Codeine Contin can cause serotonin syndrome, a rare but potentially 
life-threatening condition. It can cause serious changes in how your brain, muscles and digestive 
system work.  You may develop serotonin syndrome if you take Codeine Contin with certain 
anti-depressants or migraine medications. 
 
Serotonin syndrome symptoms include: 
 fever, sweating, shivering, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting; 
 muscle shakes, jerks, twitches or stiffness, overactive reflexes, loss of coordination; 
 fast heartbeat, changes in blood pressure; 
 confusion, agitation, restlessness, hallucinations, mood changes, unconsciousness, and 
coma. 
 
Sexual Function/Reproduction: Long term use of opioids may lead to a decrease in sex 
hormone levels.  It may also lead to low libido (desire to have sex), erectile dysfunction or being 
infertile. 
 
Tell your healthcare professional about all the medicines you take, including any drugs, 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 40 of 45 
 
 
vitamins, minerals, natural supplements or alternative medicines. 
 
The following may interact with Codeine Contin: 
 
 alcohol. This includes prescription and non-prescription medications that contain alcohol. 
Do not drink alcohol while you are taking Codeine Contin. It can lead to 
o drowsiness 
o unusually slow or weak breathing 
o serious side effects or  
o a fatal overdose 
 other sedative drugs which may enhance the drowsiness caused by Codeine Contin 
 other opioid analgesics (for pain) 
 general anesthetics ( used during surgery) 
 drugs used to help you sleep or that help reduce anxiety 
 antidepressants (for depression and mood disorders). Do not take Codeine Contin with  
monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors or if you have taken MAO inhibitors in the last 14 
days before treatment with Codeine Contin  
 drugs used to treat serious mental or emotional disorders, such as schizophrenia 
 antihistamines ( for allergies) 
 anti-emetics ( for the prevention of vomiting) 
 drugs used to treat muscle spasms and back pain 
 some heart medications (such as beta blockers) 
 anticoagulants (blood thinners) 
 drugs used to treat migraines (e.g. triptans) 
 St. John’s Wort 
 
How to take Codeine Contin: 
 
Take Codeine Contin tablets every 12 hours with or without food with a full glass of water 
 
Swallow whole. Do not cut, break, crush, chew or dissolve the tablet. This can be dangerous 
and can lead to death or seriously harm you. For three of the four dose strengths (100 mg, 
150mg and 200mg), the tablet is scored and may be broken in half.  Do not cut, break, crush, 
chew or dissolve the half tablet. 
 
Usual Adult Starting Dose: 
 
Your dose is tailored/personalized just for you. Be sure to follow your doctor’s dosing 
instructions exactly. Do not increase or decrease your dose without consulting your doctor. 
Taking higher dose can lead to more side effects and a greater chance of overdose. 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 41 of 45 
 
 
Review your pain regularly with your doctor to determine if you still need Codeine Contin. Be 
sure to use Codeine Contin only for the condition for which it was prescribed. 
 
If your pain increases or you develop any side effect as a result of taking Codeine Contin, tell 
your doctor immediately.
 
 
Stopping your Medication 
 
You should not stop taking Codeine Contin all at once if you have been taking it for more than a 
few days.  
 
Your doctor will monitor and guide you on how to slowly stop taking Codeine Contin. You 
should do it slowly to avoid uncomfortable symptoms such as having: 
 body aches 
 diarrhea 
 goosebumps 
 loss of appetite 
 nausea 
 feeling nervous or restless 
 runny nose 
 sneezing 
 tremors or shivering 
 stomach cramps 
 rapid heart rate (tachycardia) 
 having trouble sleeping 
 an unusual increase in sweating 
 heart palpitations 
 an unexplained fever 
 weakness  
 yawning 
 
By reducing or stopping your opioid treatment, your body will become less used to opioids.  If 
you start treatment again, you will need to start at the lowest dose. You may overdose if you 
restart at the last dose you took before you slowly stopped taking Codeine Contin.   
 
Refilling your Prescription for Codeine Contin: 
 
A new written prescription is required from your doctor each time you need more Codeine 
Contin. Therefore, it is important that you contact your doctor before your current supply runs 
out. 
 
Only obtain prescriptions for this medicine from the doctor in charge of your treatment. Do not 
seek prescriptions from other doctors unless you switch to another doctor for your pain 
management. 
 
Overdose: 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 42 of 45 
 
 
 
If you think you have taken too much Codeine Contin, contact your healthcare professional, 
hospital emergency department or regional Poison Control Centre immediately, even if there 
are no symptoms. 
 
Signs of overdose may include: 
 unusually slow or weak breathing 
 dizziness 
 confusion 
 extreme drowsiness 
 
Missed Dose: 
 
If you miss one dose, take it as soon as possible. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, 
then skip the missed dose. Do not take two doses at once. If you miss several doses in a row, talk 
to your doctor before restarting your medication.
 
 
What are possible side effects from using Codeine Contin? 
 
These are not all the possible side effects you may feel when taking Codeine Contin. If you 
experience any side effects not listed here, contact your healthcare professional.  
 
Side effects may include: 
 Confusion 
 Drowsiness 
 Insomnia 
 Dizziness  
 Fainting 
 Nausea, vomiting, or a poor appetite 
 Dry mouth 
 Headache 
 Problems with vision 
 Weakness, uncoordinated muscle movement 
 Itching 
 Light headedness 
 Sweating 
 Constipation 
 Low sex drive, impotence (erectile dysfunction), infertility 
 
Talk with your doctor or pharmacist about ways to prevent constipation when you start using 
Codeine Contin. 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 43 of 45 
 
 
Serious side effects and what to do about them 
 
 
Symptom / effect 
Talk to your  
healthcare 
professional 
Stop taking drug 
and get immediate 
medical help Only if 
severe 
In all 
cases 
RARE 
 
Overdose: hallucinations, confusion, inability to 
walk normally, slow or weak breathing, extreme 
sleepiness, sedation, or dizziness, floppy 
muscles/low muscle tone, cold and clammy skin. 
   
Respiratory Depression: slow, shallow or weak 
breathing.    
Allergic Reaction: rash, hives, swelling of the face, 
lips, tongue or throat, difficulty swallowing or 
breathing 
   
Bowel Blockage (impaction):  abdominal pain, 
severe constipation, nausea    
Withdrawal:  nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anxiety, 
shivering, cold and clammy skin, body aches, loss 
of appetite, sweating. 
   
Fast, Slow or Irregular Heartbeat: heart 
palpitations.    
 Low Blood Pressure: dizziness, fainting, light-
headedness.    
 Serotonin Syndrome: agitation or restlessness, loss 
of muscle control or muscle twitching, tremor, 
diarrhea 
   
 
If you have a troublesome symptom or side effect that is not listed here or becomes bad enough 
to interfere with your daily activities, talk to your healthcare professional. 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 44 of 45 
 
 
Reporting Side Effects 
We encourage you to report serious or unexpected side effects to Health Canada. The 
information is used to check for new safety concerns about health products. As a consumer, 
your report contributes to the safe use of health products for everyone. 
3 ways to report: 
 Online at MedEffect: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-
products/medeffect-canada.html 
 By calling 1-866-234-2345 (toll-free); 
 By completing a Consumer Side Effect Reporting Form and sending it by: 
- Fax to 1-866-678-6789 (toll-free), or 
- Mail to:  Canada Vigilance Program 
 Health Canada, Postal Locator 1908C 
 Ottawa, ON 
K1A 0K9 
Postage paid labels and the Consumer Side Effect Reporting Form are available 
at MedEffect (https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-
products/medeffect-canada.html). 
 
NOTE: Should you require information related to the management of side effects, contact 
your health professional. The Canada Vigilance Program does not provide medical advice. 
 
Storage: 
 
 Keep unused or expired Codeine Contin in a secure place to prevent theft, misuse or 
accidental exposure.  
 Store at room temperature (15° C- 30°C). Keep in a dry place.  
 Keep Codeine Contin under lock, out of sight and reach of children and pets.  
 Never take medicine in front of small children as they will want to copy you. 
Accidental ingestion by a child is dangerous and may result in death. If a child 
accidentally takes Codeine Contin, get emergency help right away.  
 
 
 
Codeine Contin® (codeine controlled release tablets)  Page 45 of 45 
 
 
Disposal:  
 
Codeine Contin should never be thrown into household trash, where children and pets may 
find it. It should be returned to a pharmacy for proper disposal. 
 
If you want more information about Codeine Contin: 
 
 Talk to your healthcare professional 
 Find the full product monograph that is prepared for healthcare professionals and 
includes this patient medication information by visiting the Health Canada website 
(https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/drug-
products/drug-product-database.html); the manufacturer’s website http://www.purdue.ca, 
or by calling 1-800-387-4501. 
 
This leaflet was prepared by Purdue Pharma.  
 
Last Revised: September 12, 2018 
 
Codeine Contin® is a trademark of Purdue Pharma 